Customer Segmentation

Accurate customer segmentation allows marketers to engage with each customer in the most effective way.


What is Customer Segmentation?

Customer segmentation is the practice of dividing a company’s customers into groups that reflect similarity among customers in each group. The goal of segmenting customers is to decide how to relate to customers in each segment in order to maximize the value of each customer to the business.



The Importance of Customer Segmentation

Customer segmentation has the potential to allow marketers to address each customer in the most effective way. Using the large amount of data available on customers (and potential customers), a customer segmentation analysis allows marketers to identify discrete groups of customers with a high degree of accuracy based on demographic, behavioral and other indicators.


Since the marketer’s goal is usually to maximize the value (revenue and/or profit) from each customer, it is critical to know in advance how any particular marketing action will influence the customer. Ideally, such “action-centric” customer segmentation will not focus on the short-term value of a marketing action, but rather the long-term customer lifetime value (CLV) impact that such a marketing action will have. Thus, it is necessary to group, or segment, customers according to their CLV.



CLV-Focused Customer Segmentation

Of course, it is always easier to make assumptions and use “gut feelings” to define rules which will segment customers into logical groupings, e.g., customers who came from a particular source, who live in a particular location or who bought a particular product/service. However, these high-level categorizations will seldom lead to the desired results.

It is obvious that some customers will spend more than others during their relationship with a company. The best customers will spend a lot for many years. Good customers will spend modestly over a long period of time, or will spend a lot over a short period of time. Others won’t spend too much and/or won’t stick around too long.

The right approach to segmentation analysis is to segment customers into groups based on predictions regarding their total future value to the company, with the goal of addressing each group (or individual) in the way most likely to maximize that future, or lifetime, value.


Customer Segmentation Models

Accurate customer segmentation involves tracking dynamic changes, and frequently updating new data. Although segmenting customers according to their CLV is the recommended approach, there are many types of customer segmentation models. Some of the more common types are segmentation via cluster analysis, RFM segmentation, and longevity. Some marketers might even combine one or more segmentation models in order to reach their goals.

No matter the types of segmentation models marketers decide to use, they all require marketers to create groupings of customers to serve as a first step in segmenting the customer base. Usually this will result in marketers having a series of tiers for each type of segmentation model. Marketers can then mix different tiers across models to create more defined segments. For example, mixing the highest tier of customers based on an RFM model and combining it with a low longevity tier will result in marketers having a segment of highly active, newly acquired customers.



Customer Segmentation and Machine Learning


An additional approach to customer segmentation is leveraging machine learning algorithms to discover new segments. Different to marketer-designed segmentation models, as the ones described above, machine learning customer segmentation allows advanced algorithms to surface insights and groupings that marketers might find difficulty discovering on their own.

Furthermore, marketers that create a feedback loop between the segmentation model and campaign results will have ever improving customer segments. In these cases, the machine learning model will be not only able to refine its definition of segments, but also be able to identify if a specific subset of the segment is outperforming the rest, optimizing marketing performance.




















